README.md, before:

# PRACSQL
# SQL ALIASES
- used to provide temporary distinct names within the database for ease of use and understand
- used to shorten the name or simplify of tables or columns
- Combine an output into one column instead of two using a concatenation function.

# JOINS
## INNER JOIN
- This type of JOIN returns records of data that have matching values in the joined tables. For example, assume that you want to return the full name and booking ID of customers who made bookings. In this situation, you can use the INNER JOIN clause to extract records of data from the Customers and the Bookings tables based on the matching customer ID value as follows.

## LEFT JOIN
- The LEFT JOIN returns all common records in a similar way to the INNER JOIN, plus all queried records from the left table regardless of whether there is a match in the right table or not. If there are no matching records in the right table, then null values will be inserted for the bookings IDs. 

## RIGHT JOIN
- The RIGHT JOIN returns all common records in a similar way to the INNER JOIN, plus all queried records from the right table regardless of whether there is a match in the left table or not. If there are no matching records in the left table, then null values will be inserted for the customers full names.

## SELF JOIN
- This is a special case where you need to join a table with itself to get specific information existing in the same table.  In this case you may choose the INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN or RIGHT JOIN presented earlier to query the required data. 

# UNION OPERATOR
-  you can use UNION operator to join two SELECT statements in order to combine their results sets and present as one table.
- few best practices that must be observed when creating SQL SELECT statements with a UNION operator. Every SELECT statement must have the same number of columns. All related columns have similar data types, and all related columns must have the same order in every SELECT statement-

# LAB 1
- Task 1: Little Lemon want a list of all customers who have made bookings. Write an INNER JOIN SQL statement to combine the full name and the phone number of each customer from the Customers table with the related booking date and 'number of guests' from the Bookings table.
- Little Lemon want to view information about all existing customers with bookings that have been made so far. This data must include customers who haven’t made any booking yet. 

Write a LEFT JOIN SQL statement to view the customer id from Customers table and the related booking id from the Bookings table. The expected output result should be the same as the following screenshot

# Aggregates
1. COUNT() - Returns the number of rows in a set
Example: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Employees;

2. SUM() - Calculates the total sum of a numeric column
Example: SELECT SUM(Salary) FROM Employees;

3. AVG() - Returns the average value of a numeric column
Example: SELECT AVG(Salary) FROM Employees;

4. MIN() - Returns the smallest value in a column
Example: SELECT MIN(Salary) FROM Employees;

5. MAX() - Returns the largest value in a column
Example: SELECT MAX(Salary) FROM Employees;

# GROUP BY
- The purpose of using the GROUP BY clause in a SQL SELECT statement is to group rows in one or more tables based on one or more given columns, into summary rows or subgroups. An aggregate function can be used with the GROUP BY clause to perform calculations and return a single value for each subgroup
- YOU MUST PLACE THE WHERE CLAUSE BEFORE GROUP BY CLAUSE
- The Where clause can't be used to specify a filter condition for the group data that the Group By clause generates.

# HAVING
- WE USE having therefore instead of WHERE clause
- the having clause is added after the GROUP BY clause
- the HAVING clause is used to specify a filter condition for the group data generated by the GROUP BY clause.
- HAVING is used to filter aggregated data after grouping. While both clauses seem similar in functionality, their placement in a query and their specific use cases make them unique

- The HAVING clause is used in a GROUP BY query to filter grouped data. However, in the absence of GROUP BY clause, the HAVING clause behaves just like the WHERE clause

## LAB2(HAVING) TASKS
- [TASKS](https://www.coursera.org/learn/database-structures-and-management-with-mysql/ungradedLab/eubbG/exercise-grouping-data) 
- [TASKS_2](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/tryit/query/mysql-having/#1)

# REPLACE
- The MySQL REPLACE statement is an extension to the SQL Standard. The MySQL REPLACE statement works as follows:

Step 1. Insert a new row into the table, if a duplicate key error occurs.

Step 2. If the insertion fails due to a duplicate-key error occurs:

Delete the conflicting row that causes the duplicate key error from the table.
Insert the new row into the table again.

## Using MySQL REPLACE statement to update a row
- REPLACE INTO table
SET column1 = value1,
    column2 = value2;

## Using MySQL REPLACE to insert data from a SELECT statement
- REPLACE INTO table_1(column_list)
VALUES(Value-1,Value-2,Value-3)

Commit message:

- practiced queries for constraints and implemented it - updated readme with the info on some constraints

README.md, after:

# PRACSQL
# SQL ALIASES
- used to provide temporary distinct names within the database for ease of use and understand
- used to shorten the name or simplify of tables or columns
- Combine an output into one column instead of two using a concatenation function.

# JOINS
## INNER JOIN
- This type of JOIN returns records of data that have matching values in the joined tables. For example, assume that you want to return the full name and booking ID of customers who made bookings. In this situation, you can use the INNER JOIN clause to extract records of data from the Customers and the Bookings tables based on the matching customer ID value as follows.

## LEFT JOIN
- The LEFT JOIN returns all common records in a similar way to the INNER JOIN, plus all queried records from the left table regardless of whether there is a match in the right table or not. If there are no matching records in the right table, then null values will be inserted for the bookings IDs. 

## RIGHT JOIN
- The RIGHT JOIN returns all common records in a similar way to the INNER JOIN, plus all queried records from the right table regardless of whether there is a match in the left table or not. If there are no matching records in the left table, then null values will be inserted for the customers full names.

## SELF JOIN
- This is a special case where you need to join a table with itself to get specific information existing in the same table.  In this case you may choose the INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN or RIGHT JOIN presented earlier to query the required data. 

# UNION OPERATOR
-  you can use UNION operator to join two SELECT statements in order to combine their results sets and present as one table.
- few best practices that must be observed when creating SQL SELECT statements with a UNION operator. Every SELECT statement must have the same number of columns. All related columns have similar data types, and all related columns must have the same order in every SELECT statement-

# LAB 1
- Task 1: Little Lemon want a list of all customers who have made bookings. Write an INNER JOIN SQL statement to combine the full name and the phone number of each customer from the Customers table with the related booking date and 'number of guests' from the Bookings table.
- Little Lemon want to view information about all existing customers with bookings that have been made so far. This data must include customers who haven’t made any booking yet. 

Write a LEFT JOIN SQL statement to view the customer id from Customers table and the related booking id from the Bookings table. The expected output result should be the same as the following screenshot

# Aggregates
1. COUNT() - Returns the number of rows in a set
Example: SELECT COUNT(*) FROM Employees;

2. SUM() - Calculates the total sum of a numeric column
Example: SELECT SUM(Salary) FROM Employees;

3. AVG() - Returns the average value of a numeric column
Example: SELECT AVG(Salary) FROM Employees;

4. MIN() - Returns the smallest value in a column
Example: SELECT MIN(Salary) FROM Employees;

5. MAX() - Returns the largest value in a column
Example: SELECT MAX(Salary) FROM Employees;

# GROUP BY
- The purpose of using the GROUP BY clause in a SQL SELECT statement is to group rows in one or more tables based on one or more given columns, into summary rows or subgroups. An aggregate function can be used with the GROUP BY clause to perform calculations and return a single value for each subgroup
- YOU MUST PLACE THE WHERE CLAUSE BEFORE GROUP BY CLAUSE
- The Where clause can't be used to specify a filter condition for the group data that the Group By clause generates.

# HAVING
- WE USE having therefore instead of WHERE clause
- the having clause is added after the GROUP BY clause
- the HAVING clause is used to specify a filter condition for the group data generated by the GROUP BY clause.
- HAVING is used to filter aggregated data after grouping. While both clauses seem similar in functionality, their placement in a query and their specific use cases make them unique

- The HAVING clause is used in a GROUP BY query to filter grouped data. However, in the absence of GROUP BY clause, the HAVING clause behaves just like the WHERE clause

## LAB2(HAVING) TASKS
- [TASKS](https://www.coursera.org/learn/database-structures-and-management-with-mysql/ungradedLab/eubbG/exercise-grouping-data) 
- [TASKS_2](https://www.mysqltutorial.org/tryit/query/mysql-having/#1)

# REPLACE
- The MySQL REPLACE statement is an extension to the SQL Standard. The MySQL REPLACE statement works as follows:

- Step 1. Insert a new row into the table, if a duplicate key error occurs.

- Step 2. If the insertion fails due to a duplicate-key error occurs:

- Delete the conflicting row that causes the duplicate key error from the table.
Insert the new row into the table again.

- if a primary key or unique key is not inserted inside when using the replace function it will simply add a new row unable to specify if its duplicate or not

## Using MySQL REPLACE statement to update a row
- REPLACE INTO table
SET column1 = value1,
    column2 = value2;

## Using MySQL REPLACE to insert data from a SELECT statement
- REPLACE INTO table_1(column_list)
VALUES(Value-1,Value-2,Value-3)

# CONSTRAINTS
- There are three main types of constraints in MySQL database, which can be used to enforce these rules. Key constraints which apply rules to key types. Domain constraints, used to govern the values that can be stored for a specific column and referential integrity constraints, which established rules for referential keys.

[INFO ABOUT CONSTRAINTS](https://www.coursera.org/learn/database-structures-and-management-with-mysql/supplement/C5i5X/types-of-mysql-constraints)

## updating related records or deleting them related Refrential Integrity
- you can use the on the lead cascade option. 
This option automatically deletes the related rows of data from the bookings table. And if you want to update a primary key value in the customers table, you can use the on update cascade option to automatically update the related rose in the bookings table.
- use on Delete and on Update Cascade options to delete and automatically update the related rows of data in the Bookings table. 
However, be aware that these actions depend on the Update and Delete operations taking place in the customers table
